Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Steven
Heine. He is distinguished university scholar and professor of
social and cultural Psychology at the University of British
Columbia. I'm leaving a link in the description. BOX
to our first interview and today we're talking about
his latest book, Start Making Sense How Existential Psychology
Can Help us build meaning meaningful lives in absurd
Times. So, Doctor Hein, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to have you on again.
Hi, Ricardo. Great to talk with you again.
OK, so let me start by asking you, since
we're going to talk about existential psychology today, what
is existential psychology and how does it relate to
other subfields in psychology?
Yeah. Well, existential psychology, um, I think you could
describe it as the, the science of being and
becoming. And it's very much, um, uh, um, use,
uh, an approach using scientific methods to, to study
questions about how we live our lives. It's, uh,
it's about trying to, uh, Understand questions that were
originally asked by the existential philosophers, um, um, but
using scientific methods. And, and so these are questions
such as, you know, um, uh, how is it
that we can live our lives authentically with our,
with our, uh, lives aligned with the choices that
we make. Um, HOW is it that, uh, we
can lead um meaningful lives? Um, HOW is it
that we can cope with, um, Our existential anxieties
about, about our mortality, about the idea that, that
all of our, our lives will someday inevitably, uh,
come to an end or questions about how we
come to, to narrate our lives. How do we,
we, uh, have a, a meaningful, um, narrative about,
about what's going on in our lives and, uh,
questions about, um, how we, uh, can be resilient
in, in the face of, of life stressors. And
questions about how we can try to make sense
when when things don't make sense, when when our
life uh sort of becomes absurd. How, how can
we, uh, go forward, um, when, when things just
don't seem to make sense at all. And, uh,
so that's largely what the field is about. It's
a fairly recent field in psychology, I would say,
even though these questions are very old questions. These
questions date back to sort of every tradition of,
of wisdom kind of, uh, addresses these questions, but,
but now we're using the, the tools of modern
psychological science to address them.
Great. And do you think that now was a
particularly important time to write a book on existential
questions, and if so, why?
Yeah, I, I do think this is a very
timely um period to address the question of our
our existential anxieties because this has been a very
anxious time around the world. Um, JUST sort of
one way I think that we can make sense
of this is that in the 1990s, a group
of economists put together something they called the uncertainty
Index. And this was taking, keeping track of all
the times that uh stories in the news mentioned
things that were uncertain. And they started in the
90s and for, for about a decade or so,
this, this index was always at around level about
10,000 or so. Then September 11th, 2001 hit with
terrorist attacks in the US and this jumped, jumped
right away to to about 28,000, I think it
was, and then it's continued to go up until
actually the peak point was in May 2020. It
hit 55,000, so like 5 times the level of
uncertainty that it had been through these periods before.
And we're feeling this uncertainty. We're, we're feeling this,
this stress uh rates of anxiety are high all
around the world, uh, especially, uh, with, with youth.
And so I think this is a time when,
when people are, uh, especially struggling. Struggling with their
anxieties. And I think one reason that they're struggling
with their anxieties is that, uh, their lives just
don't feel as meaningful right now. And, and feeling
that your life is meaningful is one thing that
helps to, to buffer you against the stress and
anxieties that come with the uncertainty of life.
Mhm. And at a certain point in the book,
you say that humans have evolved to seek meaning.
Could you, could you explain this? I mean, even
before we get into how we have evolved, uh,
to seek meaning, first of all, what is meaning?
Yeah, that's, that's a great question. What, what does
meaning mean? And um uh so there's been a
lot of uh research and discussion exploring this, and
to simplify, ultimately, meaning comes down to connections. Uh,
WHAT something means to you is all of the
ideas that you can connect to it. So, you
know, if I think of what is your podcast
mean to you, Ricardo, I would think it probably
means to you all of the, the, the people
that you've gotten to know through this, the, the,
the. The feelings of, of pride that you, you,
uh, might have from, uh, doing this so well,
the feelings of the challenges that you faced, uh,
in, in doing it, um, uh, the, the, you
know, the, the, the, the talks that were, uh,
especially, uh, uh, provocative and interesting to you. That
all of these kinds of connections that you have
to it are, are what provide, um, your podcast
with, with a sense of meaning to you. And
if, and if any of these kinds of connections
change dramatically, then what your podcast would mean to
you would would would also change. And that's meaning
in a, in a general sense. And we can
apply that sort of same kind of general sense
of meaning based on connections to a more specific
kind of meaning, uh, the meaning of our lives.
And, and I think the meaning of our lives
too can ultimately be understood by the connections that
we have in our life, that a that a
richly connected life is an especially meaningful life. And,
and the kinds of connections that matter are are
connections that give our life a sense of purpose,
that we have a sense of we're doing things
for uh for a reason. Um, CONNECTIONS that our
lives matter in some way, that what we're doing
has some sort of impact, um, in the grand
scheme of things, and also that, uh, these connections
are, are coherent and that that the different parts
of our lives, um, make sense. And these uh
kinds of connections here, um, uh, some kinds of
connections seem to be especially important, I think, to
gaining a sense of uh meaning in life. And
the kinds that seem to be most important are
one are interpersonal connections in life that are close
interpersonal relationships are, are especially important in providing a
sense of meaning that what happens to us is
kind of shared with our our our close relationships.
Um, ALSO, uh, we, uh, the kind of connections
that we have with our communities, that the sense
that we belong to something that we have in,
uh, that influences our identity is especially important to
a sense of meaning, um, connections that we have,
uh, with our work, um, that, uh, that, you
know, give us a sense of. Uh, OF mastery,
give us a sense of purpose and giving a
sense of belongingness, and also, uh, connections with what
transcends us sort of spiritual connections, connections with something
that goes beyond just our, uh, the, the material
world, that these kinds of connections are especially associated
with feelings that life is more meaningful. Mhm.
And how have you, have we evolved to seek
meaning them. I, I, I mean, what were the
perhaps the main steps that we had to take
to evolve this capacity?
Yeah, well, I think it's, it's useful to compare
ourselves with our, our closest animal relatives, which are
chimpanzees. We shared a common ancestor with them about
7 million years ago. And one thing that I
think is noteworthy is that primatologists and given over
all the many years of study of chimpanzees have
never observed a chimpanzee to commit suicide. Um, THAT'S
something that we don't see, uh, with chimpanzees, and,
uh, sadly it's, it's, uh, something that we do
sometimes see, uh, with, with humans. And so I
think it's questionable, how is it that that we
became, uh, what I think here is an existential
ape that that we've become. Um, AND that is
that we're in a predicament where like other species,
we all face these external challenges that we have
to confront, you know, concerns with, with famine, concerns
with, with, with, with threat and and getting our
basic needs met. We share that with other species,
but we also have here these needs. That and
threats that come from within us, that uh that
uh we need uh uh to feel that that
our life is making sense, that that we have
a sense of purpose and that that we we
matter, and that if we don't feel that that
our life is so meaningful, we, we really struggle.
So how did we become this, this species now
that is so attuned to these kinds of existential
concerns? And I think the uh the the best
way uh to make sense of this is to
realize that ultimately, um, humans live in, I think,
an ecology of meaning, um, in ways that I
don't think other species do. And what I mean
by this is that uh when humans get together,
uh, uh, we share meanings with each other. We,
we, we communicate with each other, and what happens
when we do so is that we quickly create
a set of norms, uh, a, a set of
norms that guide us, um, sort of which comes
from the sense of a shared reality that we
perceive by sharing, uh, our experiences, uh, with each
other so much. And, and so that this shared
reality forms our, our cultures. And, and these cultures
don't take all that long to to form. There,
there's been studies that, that find that like in
university dorms, at university dorms, uh, generate a distinctive
culture, and, and it, it's evident, it's measurable after
only a few months of students living together that
they start to create these dorm distinctive cultures, uh,
that, that emerge from people, uh, sharing their interactions
with each other. And so whenever we Belong to
a social network where we are sharing our experiences,
we, we developed the sense of a shared reality
and these shared norms and, and, and this can
be at, at a small level, such as a
university dorm, but also exists at, at a like
a national level, so, uh, that we have a
national culture where we're sharing the same institutions, sharing
the same media that that we are, uh, sharing
uh a lot of the, um, the same interactions
and sort of really. Any kind of group where
we are regularly interacting, we, we are forming these,
these cultures and, and so we belong to many
cultures, we belong to cultures of our region, we
belong to cultures of our country, we belong to
cultures, say, like LGBTQ culture, or we might belong
to a culture of a sport, like a hockey
culture, or or you can talk about uh like
a corporate, a corporate culture, like Microsoft culture. So
we belong to many of these cultures. And what's
important about these cultures is that they provide for
us the these norms with regards to what is
valued, what is seen as appropriate, and, and what
is not tolerated. And we evaluate our lives alongside
these, these culturally shared. Norms and we sort of
are in the position to ask ourselves, you know,
how am I doing? How am I doing here
with these, these shared norms of how I, I
think I'm supposed to be the kind of life
that, that, that I should be, be living that
we, we get through our interactions with others, um.
And that they create these standards that we are
sizing ourselves up against. And I think this is
a way that we can understand that we, yeah,
we live in this ecology of uh of meaning
and that uh um we've we've evolved to then
um sort of uh try to uh um live
a life that meets these, these standards from, from
our cultures.
And how important are stories and narratives for us
to find meaning in life and what kinds of
stories do we need?
Yeah, that's, that's, uh, an important focus of, of
much of existential psychology is this, this realization that,
uh, we, we are living our lives in the
context of a story that we are narrating the
events of, of our life in terms of a,
a story. And this is, uh, um, something that
we might not necessarily be always aware of like.
Feels that I'm have direct contact with, with reality,
that what, what's happening out there is, you know,
is, um, how I'm perceiving it. But we're always
perceiving things through this, this filter through, through a
perspective, really of, of the, the meanings that we
have, uh, around us, and that we're narrating things
in the, uh, uh, events of a story. And,
um, so one way maybe that we can see
how, how we are living our lives in the
events of a story rather than experiencing it directly
is, uh, there's a lot of research on, uh,
false memories. And, and this research shows that it's,
it's not that difficult to, uh, implant a false
memory in, in, in people, and that's what these
studies do. They, they, they interview people's families and
find out what has happened in their lives. And
then they say, uh, well, remember that time that
this thing happened, something that really didn't happen to
people, and they quickly can, uh, have the feeling
that yes, this happened, and they integrated into their
life and they connected to other aspects of their
life, and they become fully convinced that this did
happen. So we, we are telling stories and, and
they're. You know, we each have our our own
stories and, and so the same thing might happen
in the world, but because of how we integrate
in our stories, we can experience it quite differently.
I think we really saw this with the uh
the COVID pandemic, that it really was the same
pandemic unfolding across the world, but to some people,
they told a story about how this is, you
know, uh, the worst, uh, you know, uh, health,
uh, challenge that the world's faced since the, the
Spanish flu, um, that it was, it was so
dangerous, we, we needed to, to overcome it. We
needed to, you know, employ all these strategies to,
to. IT, it's caused a great anxiety. And other
people instead told the story that this is no
big deal, uh, that this is all, you know,
uh, um, fake news. This is the result of
a, you know, a totalitarian government trying to take
away people's freedoms. And so, uh, that the same
events might happen in the world, but, but how
we perceive them, how we experience them as a
result of, of stories that we tell. And uh
and there's even though we are all telling our
own story, they they often share some similar features
with with other people's stories. Um, AND, uh, for
example, that, uh, some kinds of stories, uh, for
example, there's a story of redemption is one kind
of theme that's quite common in people's stories and
that talks about, it's a story about how people
overcome a challenge. Their life that, you know, I
had this real difficulty that that I was facing
and, and I've sort of overcome it. And, and
this is a very constructive story that that when
people are framing their life in these ways, they,
uh, it tends to be associated with, with greater
well-being. Um, ANOTHER kind of story theme that that
people might tell is a, uh, a story of
contamination, which is when, uh, they tell a story
about how things have been going well in their
life, and then that something happened and their life
just kind of fell apart after that and they
sort of broken by by those events, um, and,
and this is a a kind of story that,
that is quite, uh, you know, destructive towards one
and and this. Bad for for one's well-being. But
yeah, so that we are experiencing our life through
the, the story that we are narrating. We, it's
research suggests that it's around adolescence that we start
putting the different parts of our lives together in
a story and talk about how we became the
person we are and, and, and where we're going
and how all the different events that we happened
sort of fit in to this ongoing narrative that
we tell about ourselves.
And another uh thing that you tackle in the
book, what happens to us psychologically when we encounter
things that do not fit our expectations?
Yeah, so this is something that that I've done
quite a bit of research on myself and, and
yeah, we're, we're understanding how it is that that
people go, uh, uh, about their, their lives trying
to make sense, trying to fit everything together, but
sometimes life just doesn't make sense, and, and, and
how do we, uh, respond to this? And, uh,
and, and we propose that uh people have something
of a, we call it a a sense-making system
where that, that we are, are, are motivated for
things to, to make sense, for things to have
meaning, and that when we encounter something that, that
doesn't make sense, that, that doesn't have meaning, uh,
we, we respond in a way to try to
regain a sense. So I mean, we, we, we
really have a need for things to feel that
they make sense. And, and we rely on a,
a number of different strategies in order to, uh,
uh, to for things to make sense again. So
it's, this is a homeostatic system, uh, much like
a thermostat that you have, and that it's triggered
when we encounter things that, that don't make sense.
And what we have found in our research is
that there seem to be 3 basic kinds of
responses that people have, uh, when, when things don't
make sense. Uh, ONE kind of response is something
that, uh, was originally studied and proposed by a
Swiss developmental psychologist Jean Piaget, and he was studying
how kids make sense in their lives and they
encounter things that are new to them and and
don't make sense. And he argued that one kind
of response, um, uh, he called, uh, assimilation. Uh,
I prefer the term faking meaning where, uh, what
happens is we encounter something that that doesn't make
sense, and, and our first default reaction is to
sort of assume, no, no, it makes sense. It
fits with, with the existing meaning framework. I have
this this sort of schema uh around me of
how I explain these kinds of, of events. And
I think a a a nice experimental example of
of how we do this faking meaning, uh, is
from an old study by, uh, Jerome Brunner, who
wanted to see how people respond when, uh, their,
their expectations are violated. Studied a very simple expectation,
um, playing cards, and you know, a deck of
playing cards has has regular patterns. It has, you
know, there's 4 suits, there's 2 colors, there's there's
13 different cards uh within a suit. And, and
what Jerome Bruner did, is he carefully painted over
the, uh, um, these cards, and he changed the,
the red colors to black and the black colors
to red. So there's like red clubs and black
diamonds. And what he would do is he would
show people a card, one of these doctor cards
and say, what card is this? And what he
found is that people saw the card the way
that they expected to see it. So they, they
see a uh a 6 of diamonds, a black
6 of diamonds. And they say, yeah, that's uh,
that's a 6 of diamonds, and they, they don't
notice anything, uh, unusual about it, that they, it
looks like a red 6 of diamonds to them
at first. But, um, the, the thing about this
faking meaning that we do is it's, it's rare.
COMPLETE. And instead, uh, what he also found was
that people started to get anxious over the course
of, of the study and then they, they would,
um, he called these disruptions that people would experience.
Some of them were reported, uh, in their study,
they report people getting really quite upset and like
I, I, I, I don't know what that is
anymore, and, and they would get really quite, quite
tense. And, um, so I think that this idea
here that we see things that we expect, that
often that's our first reaction is, is, is that
we see what we expect to see, and this
is this kind of faking me that goes on.
Another response to uh uh when our expectations are
violated what what PSA has studied, he called uh
accommodation, um, and I, I prefer the term um
making meaning, and that's when we sort of have
the recognition that oh. This is different from my
uh my uh current understanding of things and uh
I need to adjust my meaning framework. I need
to adjust my understanding of it to to um
accommodate this, this, this sort of new finding. Um,
AND this is something that, um, uh, um, Thomas
Kuhn, I think importantly talked about this too. Whenever
uh science goes through, uh, uh, a progressive paradigm
change, when, when we adjust our understanding of science,
when we have some new findings that just don't
fit into the old theories, we, we have to
change our theories or our our meaning frameworks, uh,
about them, and, and, uh, and this is how
we create new meaning. But the, the challenge with
creating new meaning is that this is can be
extremely difficult to do, that we are so committed
to our The meaning frameworks that we are familiar
with that we live our life with that it's
very hard to realize that that our current meaning
frameworks are inadequate and that we need to to
change them. And so this is something then that
changing our meaning frameworks requires a great deal of
cognitive effort and can take a great deal of
time. And so a third response that we found
in our own studies is that, uh, when people,
uh, uh, face something that doesn't make sense, um,
and it's, you know, it's too difficult, too cognitively,
uh, challenging to come to understand it. Uh, INSTEAD,
what people will do in this moment, in this
moment when they're sort of having this sense that
this doesn't make sense to me, they instead commit
themselves to Other meaning framework that they embrace that
another way that they tend to understand the world
that is completely unrelated to the expectation violation that
they they've just experienced, but they increase their commitment
to another belief that they have so they can
feel again that, oh things make sense again and
they can get rid of this bothersome feeling that
they have that, uh, That things are things are
nonsensical. So what we find in our studies, for
instance, when, when people encounter something that doesn't make
sense, they become an exaggerated version of themselves in
other unrelated domains so that liberal people will become
more liberal, conservative people will become more conservative, that
people increase their commitment to these unrelated belief belief
systems that they have, and by doing so they
can Get the feeling that oh things make sense
again and and sort of get rid of this
bothersome anxiety. This doesn't solve the problem that they
just encountered, but it puts them in a state
where they can function again and are better prepared
to understand this problem and and other problems that
they face in their lives.
So earlier when you were talking about uh or
you gave some examples of things that provide meaning
to our lives, you mentioned social relationships, but what
are the kinds of social relationships that we need
to find our lives more meaningful?
Yeah, so, so our social relationships are, are important,
uh, part of feeling that that life is meaningful,
and, um, and not just any social relationship will
do. So, um. So one line of research has
found that when we uh talk with strangers, we
often feel happier, um, and, uh, I, I think
that's really interesting research and, and, and, and an
important finding, but um. I don't think talking with
strangers actually makes your life feel that much more
meaningful and just to sort of kind of highlight
a contrast between happiness and sense of life is
meaningful, that, uh, these, these, these correlate quite highly,
but they only overlap about. And um and sort
of what uh brings this sort of positive feelings
is what, what happiness is, but, but uh a
sense of meaning though again is this, the sense
that that that one feels that their life is
is connected and they feel a sense of purpose
and feel a sense of mattering. And so talking
with strangers might make you happy, but I don't
think that makes you feel that, that, uh, that
these are the kind of connections that that provide
the basis of a, of a meaningful life. Rather,
it's our closest connections that, um, that, uh, the
studies that, uh, find that people who Um, have
more of of relationships that they view as very
close, report that their life is more meaningful. And
in particular, one kind of close relationship seems to
especially matter, and that's uh relationships when they're taking
on a caretaker role. Um, SUCH as, you know,
uh, taking care of the elderly or taking care
of a pet, or, or especially taking care of,
uh, children, um, and so having children. And, and
yeah, family relationships in general too, which, which are
relationships, close relationships that we have uh often, you
know, over the whole course of our lifetime, at
least some of these relationships, and, and that these
provide us with this, uh, not only with a
sense of, uh, close connection with others, um, but
also with, with a key sense of uh identity.
Um, SO I think these are many kinds of
relationships help make life feel more meaningful, but I
think it's, uh, especially, um, these family relationships and,
and ones that we take on, uh, a caretaker
role. And I would just like to emphasize because
uh in a way that this might sound rather
uh disappointing for some people who don't feel that
they um Maybe have close family relationships or or
have relationships where they're taking on a a caretaker
role. But there's one thing I think that's quite
encouraging about um research on meaning and that um
meaning seems to be fungible, uh fungible like money
is fungible, meaning that we can pay for the
meaning of our life from from different accounts. And
so even if one is not deriving much meaning
from one particular domain. Just from one's, uh, interpersonal
relationships that, uh, you can still derive meaning from
another domain that can make up for that. So
we can sort of make up for, uh, uh,
uh, a lack of meaning in our, in our
close relationships, but by having a, uh, a more
inspiring career, that the meaning that we get from
that can sort of make up for, uh, the,
the kind of lack of meaning that we might
have, uh, from our interpersonal relationships.
What about religion or religiosity? At a certain point
in the book you talk about uh the feeling
connected to something that transcends oneself. So for someone
to have that in their life, do they need
to be religious necessarily?
Yeah, that's a great question. And, um, well, so
this is one thing that uh the the literature
very consistently finds is that people who report that
they are religious tend to report that they're, they
find their life to be more meaningful, and especially
one aspect of a feeling of meaning, uh, is
the sense that their life matters, and the people
who are more religious are more likely to say
that their that their life matters. And And um
this research, I think, you know, in a way
is is uh perhaps uh somewhat concerning because, uh,
around the world, uh, in many industrialized societies, there's
been a shift away from religion and that that
that people are are are becoming um more secular
and and like working in the in the academy,
it's it's it's a very sort of uh uh
a secular um environment, um. But we've been uh
conducting some research and we find that actually a
lot of these kinds of uh spiritual connections that
people have and the kind that bring their life
meaning aren't exclusive to uh religions, um, and that,
uh, uh, many people find these same kinds of
connections uh through uh uh their more personalized uh
uh spiritual beliefs. So the uh one of the
fastest growing categories of of beliefs uh around the
world and, and especially in in industrialized societies right
now is a category it's called a spiritual but
not religious, uh, and so, uh, these people who
they, they don't subscribe to any formal, uh, formalized
sort of religious group, uh, don't follow any specific
religious doctrine. But they have more of a uh
sort of do it yourself kind of a buffet
approach to uh to ideas about the the the
hereafter. And so, for instance, they might, uh, you
know, uh, engage in some Zen meditation practices, uh,
alongside alongside some yogic traditions or maybe they're into
crystals or or or horoscopes or or or, you
know, um uh uh tarot cards or or or
something like that, they sort of have cobbled together
their own sort of unique set of of spiritual
beliefs. And in our own research, we we've compared
uh religious people to spiritual but not religious people
and to non-believers, uh, regarding, um, what we've looked
at is their, their level of meaning in life
and, uh, their level of spiritual beliefs, and their
level of uh social connection. And, uh, and what
we find is like other research that religious people
are doing really well. That's what this research was
religious people report that their lives are are are
are very meaningful. But the spiritual but not religious
report that their lives are almost as meaningful as
the religious people and and considerably more than those
who are are non-believers. And looking at our data
more more carefully and understand well why are spiritual
but not religious people feeling that their lives are
so meaningful, and we find that it's actually their
their mystical beliefs. That are correlating with their feelings
that that life is meaningful. Beliefs such as a
uh a a belief in karma, uh or a
belief that uh that they feel connected to the
the universe in some way, or even beliefs in
like superstitions, or even beliefs in something called the
law of attraction, the idea that, you know, if
you if you really believe something that you can
make it happen. And, and that these individual beliefs
are, are what are associated with, with uh greater
feelings of, of meaning in life. And, and we've
seen this in, in, in several different cultures around
the world that these kinds of spiritual beliefs are
associated with their uh uh feelings of meaning in
life. The other category of uh predictors of a
meaning in life that we found there is people's
degree of social connections and Uh, religious people tend
to feel more socially connected than do the other
groups, and we find that it's the feelings of
social connection that distinguish religious people from the spiritual
but not religious. So the, the, the religious people
seem to get two boosts here. They have these
mystical beliefs that make them feel connected to something
bigger than themselves, and then they also have uh
greater social connections, uh, perhaps others in in their
religion. And those things seem to predict uh feelings
of a of a of a meaningful life. And,
and sort of one other way that we've uh
found and found this, and I, I should say
I found this all quite surprising myself that I'm
quite a secular um person. Um, MYSELF, and so
was, was not really looking out to, to find
that, you know, these mystical beliefs are so valuable,
but this is what we've been finding. We also
studied scientists and uh we had a big sample
of, of, of people employed in scientific fields and
um and we we measured their attitudes towards science
and cause science shares something like religion in terms
of it provides a worldview for making sense of
what's happening around the world and And we found
that that uh we found sort of three different
categories of of scientific beliefs, um, that sort of
clustered together. Um, ONE of these is, uh, called
scientific optimism, a sense that, you know, through science
things will get better, that we can solve problems
through through science. Uh, ANOTHER, uh, cluster of beliefs,
um, we called, um, scientism that, uh, the belief
that science is sort of like the only route
to to knowledge, it's, it's the only valid way
of understanding things. And a and a third belief
system we called scientific reductionism, which is sort of
the idea that everything can be explained fundamentally in
terms of basic scientific principles that ultimately everything is
just a bunch of particles uh um that that
are just combined in in in different ways. And,
and what we found with that is that the
more that someone embraces the scientific reductionist perspectives and
the the scientistic perspectives, actually they score lower in
a sense of that life is meaningful, especially with
the sense that their life matters. Um, SCIENTIFIC optimism
was uh slightly positively related to to more meaning
in life, but just the idea that We can
explain everything as as part of a materialistic universe
that this seems to be associated with lower uh
Feelings of of meaning in life. So I, I
think this research has convinced me at least, that
there's something important about believing that there's more than
just what's here, what we're encountering in the here
and now, that there's more to to uh to
life, to the universe than than just this material
basis of it. And now that seems to be
an especially valuable kind of perspective to take that
that people who have that perspective report that their
life is more meaningful.
In what ways does our being aware of our
own mortality, our knowing that we will die when
they affect us uh existentially and psychologically and uh
how do people deal with that?
Yeah, so this is one of the big existential
challenges that, that, that we face, you know, that
uh we're leading this, this life-riching experience that we're
we're telling this, this life narrative. And that we
are aware that someday it's all gonna come to
an end, that someday we reach the last page
of of our of our life story. And, and
this creates a a a great deal of existential
anxiety that that that we have a drive to
want to persist in things. And, and like, like
all species, you know, we are trying to survive,
that we're trying to avoid things that are threatening.
We, we, we are uh. Trying to approach things
that, that, that are, that are nourishing, that are
rewarding. Um, SO we're trying to survive, but here
we have this awareness, um, that, uh, that someday
we're gonna fail at this. Inevitably, we're gonna fail,
and, and that this creates a, a great deal
of anxiety about this. And so, uh, this question
has been explored a lot in, uh, a research
tradition called terror management theory. Uh, WHICH is explored
just how, how people respond to this, this existential
terror that comes with the awareness that that our
life someday, uh, is, is going to end. And,
and what this theory has proposed and has demonstrated
in, uh, more than 1000 studies, um, Is that
uh when people are reminded of the fact that
they're going to die. We all know this, but
we try to keep this thought out of, out
of awareness here that we generally are, are, are
thinking about our lives in terms of, of, um,
you know, all, all of, uh, All of our
relationships, all of our ambitions, all that that that
we are trying to do, that's what we tend
to focus on. And the fact that someday we're
gonna fail at all these, all these things are
gonna come to an end is is really bothersome.
And so what this theory, Terry Madison theory proposes
is that that people want to Feel that they
are immortal in some way that we that we
have this strong drive to think that that the,
um, that, that in some way that that that
our that our lives will continue to exist. And
it proposes that we, we do so in one
of two ways. One, we aspire for something that
they call symbolic immortality. And, and the uh the
way that we can achieve this is that, um,
uh, that. We, we recognize that that we are
part of a culture, um, and, and that our
cultures, uh, are somewhat more immortal than than we
are, at least, and that, that our cultures have
often been around for a long time and we
expect that they're gonna continue to exist, uh, in
the, in the future. And so we can come
to feel a little more symbolically immortal if we
can view ourselves as a, as a key player
in the in this meaningful cultural drama that that
we, uh, exist within. And so that people can
respond to these thoughts of death by thinking of
their culture as being sort of, uh, uh, um,
better, more enduring, more stable, and that they are
someone who's living up. To their cultural ideals. So
the kinds of reactions that they get in, in
studies where they remind people of the fact that
they're going to die is they find that after
that, people will become a little more patriotic. I
think that my culture is really good, um, that
they, uh, will become, uh, they, they want to,
uh, defend the status quo more, they want to
punish people who break rules more that, that as
a way of sort of protecting the, the sort
of cultural system of, of how we're supposed to
be. Um, AND they come to view their culture
as better than other people's cultures, that, that we're
the chosen people, um, and, and not others. The,
the existence of other people's worldviews kind of challenges
the idea that that that that our culture is
special, that that that that uh we we're the
chosen people. And so there have been many hundreds
of uh of studies that have demonstrated this. The
theory is, is somewhat controversial and, and, uh, there
have been questions about how replicable these studies are.
We, we have recently published a paper where we
reviewed the entire literature, uh, that we're able to
uh um quantify, um, uh, in this case. Investigated
one particular question, um, which was over 800 studies,
and we find that overall across all these studies
that there is, uh, pretty good, not perfect, but
pretty good psychometric evidence that that this effect seems
to be real and and uh and and stable.
Um, SO that's one way that people respond is
trying to become symbolically immortal, but really, Symbolic immortality
has its limits, uh, um, really what people desire
to feel that they are immortal, that they will
continue to exist. And so another way that that
people respond to thoughts about death is that we
Most people uh have some kind of uh religious
belief. Um, THERE'S religions all around all around the
world. It's, it's, it's a, it's a universal feature
of our uh society. All cultures have religions, and,
and they, uh, uh, almost all of them, uh,
uh, and with the exceptions are just a little
unclear, but almost all of them promised some kind
of continued existence after our death. Um, THAT either
you're gonna be reincarnated or or you're going to
um go hopefully to heaven or but maybe to
hell, that somehow that that you will continue to
exist, uh, um, past, uh, uh, um, or, uh,
after you die. And um and research finds that,
yeah, when you remind people of their death, they're
more likely to have these beliefs and there's the
saying, you know, there there's no atheists and foxholes,
and yet after people have these encounters that that
where they're reminded facing this threat that they could
almost die, they are common reactions for people to
become more religious then and embrace more this idea
that no, no, somehow we're going to continue to
exist. Some part of me is going to continue
to exist in the future.
So you do lots of work in cultural psychology.
So I would like to ask you now, when
it comes to the kinds of things that people
uh give meaning to or that find meaningful, do
they vary a lot cross culturally?
Yeah, well, I think there's some ways that we
can see uh differences in uh um uh things
that provide a sense of meaning in life, but
in some ways there's also uh a lot of
similarities. Um, SO one thing that where you can
see, uh, quite clear differences in, in, uh, a
sense of meaning in life is that people who
live in more collectivistic cultures on average tend to
report that their lives are more meaningful than people
who live in more individualistic cultures. Um, AND, uh,
I think this kind of makes sense when we
think of the, uh, the idea that connections underlying,
uh, sense of a meaningful life, and that, uh,
people living in collectivistic societies really are connected to
at least these collectives more to they belong to
these, uh, enduring interpersonal relationships which are sort of,
uh, uh, that are prioritized and, and, and that
they are, are, are guiding their lives. So they
belong in a more fundamental sense. Then I think
to people in individualistic societies who are sort of
choosing, uh, the, the, the relationships that they form,
they are choosing what to do, but prioritizing their
their own individual perspective. And, and that I think
makes it, uh, a little, uh, makes one a
little more vulnerable here to, to having the sense
that, that, that one's life is, is, is meaningful
because it's all up to me and, but up
to me. I'm, I'm vulnerable. I, I make mistakes.
I, uh, I might not be doing things right,
um, and I'm maybe not gonna be as well
connected as someone from a more collectivistic culture. So
that's one way that we can see a difference,
uh, across societies. Another way, which I, uh, find
especially curious, is that studies find that people who
live in poorer countries actually report having more meaning
in life than people who live in wealthy societies.
And, um, And, and this, I think especially curious
because you get the opposite pattern when you look
at happiness in, in general, uh, people living in
wealthier societies are having more of their basic needs
met and and they're having more positive experiences because
of that and tend to report on average that
their lives are happier. But when it comes to
the sense that how meaningful is life, uh, it's,
yeah, curiously in, in poorer societies that people report
more meaning. And I I think this sort of
highlights the key role of, of our struggles in
making life meaningful too. It's, uh, it's, I think
one thing that gives our life, uh, a sense
of purpose, that, that there are things that I
need to do that I, uh, that I need
to work on that, that I'm focused on as,
as for survival, perhaps. But it, but it, it
makes my life meaningful that that I know why
I'm doing things. I, I, I, I know what
I, what I need to do. And in more
affluent societies that often like our basic needs are
are are largely taken care of and so it
can become sometimes a little more challenging to find,
well, well, why am I doing things? What is
it that I need to do? And it might
not be that obvious to someone who's who's living
a a a a rather comfortable, comfortable life. Um,
SO that's, I think another key difference in um
the ways that, um, Uh, uh, societies differ in
their level of, uh, sense of meaning. On the
other hand though, uh, research finds, I think, quite
curiously that it's really the same kinds of predictors
of, uh, of a meaningful life across society. So
across societies, people's feelings of interpersonal relationships, close interpersonal
relationships predict a more meaningful. Life, uh, across societies,
it's people's kinds of, uh, uh, spiritual beliefs that
that predict, uh, uh, a more meaningful life. It's,
it's across societies that, um, uh, that, that people's
attachments to their work predict, uh, a, a more
meaningful life. Um. Same kinds of personality traits that
are associated with meaningful life, uh, seem to exist
uh across societies. Um, WE have a recent paper
where we're exploring the different kinds of purpose that
that that people report as guiding their lives and
We found ultimately that there's about 16 different kinds
of purpose that people regularly endorse as guiding their,
their lives, and, and we found across 4 very
different societies that is really the same kinds of
purposes that that were uh especially associated with, uh,
with, um, pursuing a meaningful life that there actually
wasn't that much difference across societies, that the same,
uh, purposes, especially with things regarding. Um, uh, uh,
TRYING to feel that one's life matters, uh, um,
doing things for others, feeling committed to, uh, religious
beliefs, these all correlated with, with, uh, uh, a
more meaningful life, and some other kinds of purposes,
such as working to achieve status or or working
to achieve money, um, we're not so associated with
meaningful life. So on the one hand, we can
see some striking differences in the overall level of
meaningful lives across societies. But many of the same
basic predictors of meaningful life are quite similar across
societies. And and I think the similarities sort of
highlights, um, how much of the fact that maybe
this, this need for meaning that we have is,
is somewhat of an adaptation that we, we thrive
when we feel that our lives are meaningful. It's
associated with all of these good outcomes. Feeling that
your life is more meaningful is associated with better
mental health. Associated with with with better physical health.
Uh, IT'S, it's, uh, less associated with, you know,
with, with, with suicidal feelings. Um, AND so that
this seems that when people have a sense of
meaning in their life, they seem to be faring
better they're they're doing better in many ways. And
so I, I, I wonder if we have evolved
this as an adaptation that it's important to feel
that life is meaningful because if we don't, we
tend to be struggling.
So what can we learn from existential psychology that
we can apply to our lives in the 21st
century that could help us build meaning in our
lives? I mean, are there particular strategies we can
resort to?
Yeah, I, I, I think there are. I think,
I think this has a lot of uh practical
applications, and I think kind of explain this best
in sort of two different ways, uh, and what
this is what research has pointed to on, on
the, the one sort of set of strategies I
think we can learn from is that uh research
points to some ways that uh we can get
a temporary boost in meaning by by by some
activities. And that's a curious thing about feelings of
meaning in life is that they fluctuate. It's not
that someone feels consistently, my life is meaningful, and
they just keep going at this as an even
keel. No, our our feelings of meaning in life,
uh, they fluctuate that they're higher at some points
and lower at some points, but there are some
things that can, we can do that can make
our lives uh uh feel more meaningful. And and
so what research points to, for instance, is um
nostalgic reflections tend to provide a a a temporary
boost in life. When we look back at our
life and we look back at, at, at, you
know, these past chapters of our life story, um,
it These help us to understand better about who
we are and, and, and the, the journey that
that we've been on. And so, uh, studies find
that, uh, when people reflect back nostalgically on their
life, they, uh, after that, they report that their
life feels more meaningful. Um. And especially not all
kinds of memories are equally nostalgic, but the kinds
that are especially nostalgic are our social memories of
the past, how we were connected with others, things
that we were doing uh in in our past
with others, and also sort of some kind of
key events in our lives, you know, like when
we. We, we graduated and got married or, or,
or, you know, you threw away that last pack
of cigarettes that, um, you know, that these kinds
of moments here, uh, we tend to find especially
nostalgic. So one strategy then is when you feel
that life isn't so meaningful. You know, maybe uh
flip through an old uh photo album, maybe play
some songs from the soundtrack of your youth, and,
and that you'll, you, you'll be reminded about the
the life story that you you've told this far
and, and the journey that that you've been on.
So that's one thing that provides a temporary boost,
um. Uh, ANOTHER line of research from the tradition
of, uh, self-affirmation theory finds that you can feel
a little more existentially grounded if you reflect upon,
uh, the values that are especially important to you.
Um, uh, WHAT do you really care about? And,
and in these studies, what people are asking, they're
asked to write a paragraph about what really matters
to you, what, what are the values that that
that you hold uh most strongly. And what this
research finds is that after people have done this,
that they have this, this temporary boost where their
life feels more meaningful, that they feel more resilient
and and are better able to to to handle
the the the the challenges with life. So it
it it provides us this nice uh uh temporary
boost to meaning. Also, I think another sort of
set of strategies to to make uh life feel
more meaningful is that one can engage in some
sort of something that, uh, creates a sense of
self-transcendence such that you feel that you are connected
to something beyond yourself. And so this can be
engaging in any kind of uh religious or or
or spiritual ritual. Um, IT can also um be
listed through something like a mindfulness. Meditation makes them
sort of feel more connected to things. And also,
quite simply, uh, research finds that, uh, going out
in nature, uh, and, and sort of feeling connected
to, to the natural world provides this, this temporary
boost, uh, which increases our, our sense of well-being.
So these are some things that we can do
that provide a, uh, uh, a, a temporary boost.
Um, I don't think they're gonna, you know, change
your life forever, but, but. They're useful for those
times when you're you're feeling a little alienated, feeling
a little disconnected from things. And on the other
hand, uh, what are the kind of more enduring
things that that we can do, uh, uh, to
provide a sense of meaning? Well, I think we
can understand. The the best strategies here and considering
what are the the the key foundations of a
meaningful life, and, and I think it's these domains
of connections that that are uh especially important. So
our, our interpersonal relationships, so, uh, working towards building
um these interpersonal relationships, spending more time with, with
our loved ones, uh, engaging activities, uh, with them,
um. Uh, WE can feel more meaningful if we
get more involved with our communities, uh, uh, doing
things for our communities, especially if it's an activity
that's aligned with, with your values. So, so say
if you're, you're volunteering for a particular cause that's
important to you, say you care about improving the
environment, or care about some political cause and and
and sort of volunteering for those where you belong
to a community and doing something that that is
something of great value to you. That I think
will lead to um a more meaningful lives and
um uh through our work, uh, if, if you
have work that you find uh uh especially meaningful
and rewarding, then engaging your time in that work
will make you uh feel that that life is
more meaningful and that, um, or, or any kind
of uh developing any kinds of these sort of
spiritual, uh, uh, connections, any, and, and here's where
I think, you know, It's it's great if, if
you belong to a religion, uh, I say uh,
stick with that, and if, if you don't, if
you're more secular person, I think, I think it's
useful to just think of how, what kinds of
spirit traditions might you be open to. You're not
going to be open to all of them, but
maybe there's some that that feel that, oh, that
that's something that I might be able to incorporate
in my life. I think, uh, um, you likely
do stand to benefit by incorporating those. At least
this evidence I should emphasize is correlational evidence, um,
so that people who have these beliefs tend to
feel their life is more meaningful, um, uh, uh,
but I, I think it it it follows in
that. To the extent that you can develop these
sense of connections, your life might also um be
more meaningful. And finding uh things that give you
a sense of purpose to reflect upon what kinds
of things, uh, do you feel uh a sense
of purpose in your life, and to spend more
time doing those, um. Uh, ANOTHER key thing that's
been found to be associated with, uh, a meaningful
life is, uh, living a psychologically rich life, that
having a set of diverse, challenging experiences are things
that make life more meaningful. So I think this
is this is important because, uh, lots of things
make life more pleasant, um, so you might find
it very content just to, um, Uh, you know,
to sit, play some nice music, make jigsaw puzzles
all day. Um, THAT, that might make you feel
quite pleasant, but that's probably not gonna make your
life feel quite as meaningful because it's not so
psychologically rich. It's not so varied and challenging. And
so, yeah, what research finds is that People who
lead more psychologically rich like put themselves in more
novel situations, more challenging situations, being open to new
things, trying out, you know, new things, trying different
restaurants, traveling the world, that these things make life
feel more rich, and that makes life more meaningful.
And last, um, To, uh, think about the, the
life narrative that that you have. And this is
the thing about stories that that we're not bound
to any particular stories that that uh that we
have a story about what has happened in our
in our lives, but um there are different ways
that we can narrate our lives, and some seem
to provide more meaning than others and um. You
know, a set, you've had a set set of
experiences that have happened to you over the course
of your life. But how you tell your life
story, the, the, the, the way you connect those
past episodes and the kinds of episodes that you
reflect on is something that you have some control
over. And one kind of life story that seems
to be especially associated with feelings of um more
meaning in life, uh, is a life story that
that's, um, that Joseph Campbell's, uh, who's a mythologist,
he identified some of his common to many myths
around the world, and he called it a hero's
journey. And this is a feature of many of
the best stories in the world. Um, AND, and,
uh, it's, it's, it's sort of the basis of
stories such as in Star Wars, or in Harry
Potter or or Hunger Games or or Lord of
the Rings. And, and the features of this hero's
journey story is the idea that, that, uh, we're
on a quest. That, that we, we face some
challenges along the way that we rely on some
allies in our life to help us to surmount
those challenges and that through the process, we, we
are transformed, that, that we grow and and and
change and, and can ultimately come to surmount some
of these big challenges. And It might not feel
that your life has been a a a hero's
journey, but, um, researchers found that if you reflect
on these sort of key elements of a hero's
journey, like, what are the big challenges that you
faced in your life? Who are the key allies
that that you've uh relied on here? How have
you changed and and and grown? What kinds of
things have you surmounted? And uh research has found
that when people focus on these elements and and
and try to just uh tell a narrative about
their life of how they've gone through this hero's
journey, how they have, um, Relied on allies and
facing these challenges, uh, and changed and and overcome
some of these challenges that they report feeling that
their life is more meaningful, that this seems to
provide the basis for a more meaningful life. So
these are some, I think, sort of a practical,
uh, um, challenges, I mean, uh, strategies that, that,
uh I think uhential psychology um can offer for
us to help us to lead more meaningful lives.
Great, and I think those are great strategies to
end our interview on. So the book is again
start making sense how existential psychology can help us
build meaningful lives in absurd times. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview.
And Doctor Heine, just before we go apart from
the book, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Sure, so, uh, well, I'm at the University of
British Columbia. Um, uh, IF you Google me, uh,
Steven Heine, you will find two people. One is
a, uh, professor who studies Japanese religions from Florida,
and myself who I've done a lot of research
in, in Japanese culture, but who studies psychology, um,
and, uh. I have a few. I, this is
my 3rd book. I also have a book on
cultural psychology, and I have a book on how
people understand, uh, genetic determinism, and, and this book
on, uh, uh, start making sense. Um, SO I,
I'd say look at the internet and you can
find my web page at the University of British
Columbia as well.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's always
a great pleasure to everyone.
Thanks so much, Ricardo. It was a lot of
fun talking with you as always.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punterrusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Per Crolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.